# THESIS MANUSCRIPT
## INTRODUCTION
Emerging infectious diseases pose a great threat to global biodiversity and are responsible for species declines and extinctions around the globe (Fisher et al., 2012). Many amphibian population declines have been attributed to the chytrid fungus, *Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis*, the causative agent of Chytridiomycosis (Kerry et al., 2007; Berger et al., 1998; Voyles et al., 2009). Past studies have indicated that amphibians are the most threatened vertebrates by body size and that Chytridiomycosis has contributed to the decline of at least 501 amphibian species globally, with several that have been driven to complete extinction (Carvalho et al., 2017; Ripple et al., 2017; Fisher and Gerner, 2020). While many studies have employed conventional field and laboratory methods to delineate the pathogenicity of *B. dendrobatidis*, several have utilized spatial modeling techniques to determine the effect of variable factors on its distribution.
Species distribution modeling is a commonly used modeling technique that is based on the relationship between species occurrences and the environmental variables recorded at their locations (Komori et al., 2020). These models can be utilized for many applications within the field of ecology including identifying threats to the conservation of species (e.g. Thuiller et al., 2005), managing the impacts of species invasions (e.g. Walther et al., 2009), and for predicting the spread of zoonotic disease through host and vector species distribution model analysis (e.g. de Almeida et al., 2019). Species distribution modeling for fungi has been historically rare compared with other taxa (Elith and Leathwick, 2009) but has increased in application in the recent past (Hao et al., 2020). For *B. dendrobatidis*, environmental variables/factors such as altitude, temperature and precipitation related variables have been identified as contributors to its distribution (Stuart et al., 2004; Berger et al., 2004 and Raffel et al., 2015). It is postulated that temperature increases will lead to the range expansion of pathogen distributions, leading to more contact with potential hosts (Garrett et al., 2006). Climate conditions often influence disease outbreaks (Pascual et al., 2008) and are indicated to influence chytridiomycosis infections (Bosch et al., 2007).
Previous research has addressed the link between the changing climate and human-associated factors to the future distribution of *B. dendrobatidis* (Rohr et al., 2011). However, none to date have addressed how these factors interact to shape these predictions. Therefore, my primary research question is: How much variation in the distribution of *B. dendrobatidis* is unique to and shared among climate, human, and other factors given their individual contributions to determining the distribution? In other words, how do human and climatic factors interact statistically, and how do these interactions affect the predicted distribution of *B. dendrobatidis*?
I hypothesize that (H1) temperature will play an important role in determining the distribution of *B. dendrobatidis*, where a temperature range of habitat suitability can be determined, and future projections involving an increase in temperature will contribute to an increase in habitat suitability for *B. dendrobatidis*. (H2) human population density (HPD) and other anthropogenic variables will have a positive relationship with the habitat suitability of *B. dendrobatidis* unique from its relationship with climate.
Based on my research question and hypotheses, my study objectives are: (1) determine environmental and anthropogenic variables important to *B. dendrobatidis* occurrence, (2) construct baseline (current conditions), and future projection models of the potential habitat suitability for *B. dendrobatidis*, (3) delineate the percent contributions and permutation importance of each of the environmental and anthropogenic variables, (4) identify the statistical characteristics between the variation contributed.
* METHODS
** Species Distribution Modeling
Species distribution modeling is the primary method for analyzing spatial ecology: a field which lies at the intersection of geography and ecology and examines the role of space in ecological processes in local and global scales (Di Cola et al., 2016). The aim of these model constructions is to investigate what factors shape the distribution of species (Peterson, 2011). The use of this method to model species’ distributions has increased in recent years (Guisan et al., 2013) and many new methods have been developed for applications in species distribution modeling (Guisan et al., 2013; Skidmore et al, 2011). For the purposes of this study, the set of tools used in modeling will be provided by the ecospat R package (Di Cola et al., 2016); the main functions of this package provide support for pre, core, and post modeling analysis. However, this package will be primarily used for its core modeling functions and obtaining the values essential for further analysis. To construct a species distribution model, one must use one or several modeling algorithms which utilize species occurrence as location data and environmental variable data in the form of a continuous range of values. The ensemble modeling technique will be utilized to construct the potential current distribution of /B. dendrobatidis/. A range of modeling algorithms can be combined in an ensemble to represent the averaged corresponding predictions generated by each (e.g. Forney et al., 2015; Grenouillet et al., 2011; Oppel et al., 2012; Pikesley et al., 2013). The modeling algorithms that will be considered for selection include maximum entropy (MAXENT; this machine learning algorithm normally results in good predictive models and is especially designed to deal with scarce presence-only data; Elith et al. 2006), generalized linear model, generalized additive model (GLM and GAM; have been shown to effectively model the realized niche due to their empirical nature; Guisan et al., 2002), multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS; another regression technique like GLM, produces a local model through non-linear and linear relationships between predictors (environmental variables) and response variables; Friedman 1991), artificial neural networks(ANN; a technique that would be valuable in this case use of anthropogenic variables where nonparametric modeling is useful considering the non-linear relationship expected between species occurrence and anthropogenic variables; Lippit et al., 2008), classification tree analysis (CTA; a model where a binary decision is made at each node of the classification tree involving a single environmental parameter at each node; Amiri et al., 2020), flexible discriminant analysis (FDA; a nonparametric regression method based on linear discriminant analysis for non-linear multigroup classification; Hastle et al., 1994), and random forest (RF; a machine learning technique which works as a combination of tree predictors where the ultimate tree value depends on each independent tree; Breiman, 2001). Furthermore, I will determine which combination of two algorithms from this list are best suited for the predictor data (environmental variables) and the response variables representing /B. dendrobatidis’/ occurrence. Currently, nonparametric modeling algorithms such as MAXENT and artificial neural networks are being better considered for the ensemble algorithm selection, as nonparametric algorithms are best suited for the non-linear relationship exhibited in the input data which will include human-associated factors (human population density; port distance) and species occurrences (/B. dendrobatidis/).
** Species Occurrence Records
I will obtain the species occurrence records of /B. dendrobatidis/ from multiple datasets within the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (https://www.gbif.org) utilizing the dismo R package gbif function (Hijmans et al., 2017). This data is subject to limitations in their taxonomic and geographic information through errors arising through the practices of citizen science (Serra-Diaz et al., 2018; Thessen and Patterson, 2011). Therefore, each record will be subject to scrutiny. The latitudinal and longitudinal data within these records will be the focus for model construction. Furthermore, in order to reduce model complexity, the model is being limited to the extent of Australia where most of the /B. dendrobatidis/ records are contained (fig. 1).

Include Occurrence Image

Containing the extent of this study to Australia will prioritize ecological significance over the fit of the model. Increasing the complexity (i.e., including the scattered global occurrences of /B. dendrobatidis/) would result in a model producing biased estimates of climatic suitability (Bell and Schlaepfer, 2016). Furthermore, containing this study to this region will allow for a more in-depth analysis on the unique effects of the anthropogenic variables (human population density; port distance) which would not be possible in a global extent given the current state of the data.
Following the common practices of preparing species occurrence data for model construction the following steps will be taken. (1) Determine the risk of sampling bias within the dataset. This is important to consider because a shortcoming of pre-collected data is the lack of a maintained sampling effort, where data are usually collected opportunistically (Bird et al., 2014) and exhibits a sampling effort which tends to be biased towards easily accessible and populated areas. By utilizing human-geography covariates such as the distance of each occurrence record to population centers (human), one could then present the likelihood that a site is sampled. In this case, the risk of sampling bias will be determined through modeling the sampling intensity throughout space utilizing these human-geography covariates (e.g. Stolar and Nielsen, 2015; Zaniewski et al., 2002). (2) Exclude all duplicates within the dataset and observe the change in risk. (3) Prepare a range of spatial buffers, thus removing records based on the distance between each record. (4) Compile these results for future analysis when delineating which features affect the structure of the sampling.
** Environmental Variable Data
The environmental data that will be utilized in the construction of the distribution of /B. dendrobatidis/ will be obtained from the Climatologies at High Resolution for the Earth’s Land Surface Areas (CHELSA henceforth) database (Karger et al., 2017). For fungi especially, the spatial scale and resolution of the variable dataset influence what variables are best suited to describe the species’ distribution (Austin and Niel, 2011; Cohen et al., 2016). In line with that, several resolutions will be analyzed to observe which are appropriate to use for /B. dendrobatidis’/ distribution. Another characteristic of fungal species distribution models to consider is dispersal. Species distribution models assume a dispersal equilibrium, and potential species distribution in many cases are not shaped by dispersal properties or history (Araújo and Pearson, 2005). However, in the case of /B. dendrobatidis/ microscopic spores can travel through free-flowing water (Hao et al., 2020) and this characteristic should be considered in the modeling of its potential distribution. For this study, human-initiated dispersal will be accounted for through the creation of port distance, and the inclusion of human population density anthropogenic variables.
*** Current Variable Data
The variable data that will be considered for the construction of the current species distribution model is part of the CHELSA Bioclim dataset which includes 19 bioclimatic variables (Bio1 = Annual Mean Temperature; Bio2 = Mean Diurnal Range; Bio3 = Isothermality; Bio4 = Temperature Seasonality; Bio5 = Max Temperature of Warmest Month; Bio6 = Min Temperature of Coldest Month; Bio7 = Temperature Annual Range; Bio8 = Mean Temperature of Wettest Quarter; Bio9 = Mean Temperature of Driest Quarter; Bio10 = Mean Temperature of Warmest Quarter; Bio11 = Mean Temperature of Coldest Quarter; Bio12 = Annual Precipitation; Bio13 = Precipitation of Wettest Month; Bio14 = Precipitation of Driest Month; Bio15 = Precipitation Seasonality; Bio16 = Precipitation of Wettest Quarter; Bio17 = Precipitation of Driest Quarter; Bio18 = Precipitation of Warmest Quarter; Bio19 = Precipitation of Coldest Quarter). These bioclimatic variables calculated from monthly temperature and precipitation and are developed for the purposes of species distribution modeling and other ecological applications (Karger et al., 2017). After the data is obtained in the form of raster files, the number of variables will be reduced according to a correlation threshold (r < 0.7) throughout the whole variable dataset; this will be done within the extent of the study region (Australia). The variable pairs exhibiting a correlation above a measured threshold of r = 0.7 will then be filtered to only include the variable within the pair with any ecological significance. This ecological significance will be further determined through literature review. Once variables exhibiting a measured correlation above or equal to this threshold (r < 0.7) are removed, the remaining variables will be better considered for the initial model construction. The final selection of variables involves selecting variables which are ecologically important to the species’ distribution (Bosso et al., 2017). By reducing the number of variables one can reduce the complexity of the model and thus reduce the potential for bias, as reducing highly correlated variable data reduces spatial autocorrelation, a characteristic in geospatial data which inflates type I errors in traditional statistics and can affect the estimated parameters in the model construction (Lennon, 2000).
*** Future Variable Data
The future variable data will be obtained from the CHELSA database (Karger et al., 2017) in the form of downscaled CMIP5 climatoligies for the 2050 and 2070 time steps. When selecting CMIP5 models for impact studies a minimum of 5 models should be selected to represent a healthy amount of uncertainty in climate model projections. Moreover, models exhibiting more distance than relation should be better considered (Sanderson et al., 2015). Currently, the steps needed to select the final set of future climate models for consideration in constructing the potential future distribution of /B. dendrobatidis/ has not been completed.  However, only models including at least two representative concentration pathways for the 2050 and 2070 time steps will be considered. This will allow for a dataset of modeling results that can then be analyzed to gain insight into the percent difference in habitat suitability between each future model and the baseline (current conditions) model (e.g. Bosso et al., 2017).
*** Anthropogenic Variable Data
Human population density (HPD) will be calculated from population data (2018/2019 tax year) (Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2021) and will be converted into a raster format compatible with species distribution modeling (Murray et al., 2010). Another anthropogenic variable that will be utilized is port data derived from the raw data (2018/2019) provided by the Ports Australia (2021) organization. This data will be manipulated in a way that transforms the location of major ports in Australia to the radial in-land distance between the ports and /B. dendrobatidis/ occurrences. This will then be translated into a spatial raster format to be utilized in the species distribution model construction. The use of port data is influenced from the findings in the Murray et al. (2010) study, where port cities were identified as having a positive influence on the occurrence of /B. dendrobatidis/. However, no analyses of a port-dispersal relationship have been accomplished to this date.
** Model Construction
All models will be represented as binary maps of habitat suitability (1 = presence / 0 = absence) where the presence threshold is based on the initial model logistic range of 90% habitat suitability. This is a value commonly placed for defining a species’ presence and is normally applied to studies relying on datasets collected over a long time by several observers and methods (Russo et al. 2015). Furthermore, the model will be projected onto Australia under different future climate scenarios. Therefore, in order to project these models, the variables in the projection area must meet a state of environmental similarity with the environmental variable data used to calibrate it. This condition of similarity can be ascertained through inspecting Multivariate Environmental Similarity Surfaces (MESS) (Elith et al., 2010). This tool is used to calculate the similarity of each point of the projection to a set of reference points, and then returns the results as a map (Elith et al., 2010). Moreover, these MESS maps can help identify extrapolated areas and provide a quantitative measure of projection uncertainty (Bosso et al., 2017).
Results of the model construction (initial/current conditions) will be obtained in the form of percent contributions and permutation importance (dependent on iteration value) of each of the predictor variables utilized in the modeling procedure. Differences in the percent contributions between climatic and anthropogenic predictor variables will be the subject of interest for determining the statistical relation between the two.
** Model Validation
The models will be tested utilizing several validation methods. The two methods being considered are the receiver operated characteristics analyzing the area under the curve (AUC) (Fielding and Bell, 1997) and the true skill statistic (TSS) (Allouche et al., 2006).
** Disease Risk
As a test of performance, stepping away from model accuracy, I will directly assess whether the results of the model (base/current condition) are consistent with descriptions of reported amphibian population declines. This will be done by providing geographical references of these population declines overlayed with the potential logistic distribution of /B. dendrobatidis/. Moreover, these locations will be further analyzed by firstly constructing a histogram plot of these reported amphibian population declines with bins of percent occurrence ranges of /B. dendrobatidis/. This will provide an initial average threshold value of percent probability occurrence in relation to amphibian population declines and will provide the basis for further analysis.
** Statistical Analysis
For analyzing the modeling results, t-tests will be utilized to compare the outcomes of the most important variable data contributing to areas characterized as suitable for B. dendrobatidis between the current time model and those constructed for each of the future climatic scenarios. Furthermore, there are several methods which can be employed to analyze the variation in the distribution of /B. dendrobatidis/ to what is unique to and shared among climate, human, and other factors. The steps that will be taken to analyze and interpret the data are: (1) the examination of variable response shapes which are common outputs in constructing species distribution models (e.g. Niittynen and Luoto, 2018), (2) measuring the percent contribution of every variable within the predictor dataset (e.g. Bradie and Leung, 2017), (3) measuring the relative importance of each variable in the dataset (e.g. Dyderski et al., 2018); determined by the comparative percent measurements in step 2. The analyses in steps 2 and 3 will be determined from the resulting data of the modeling procedure. This pipeline analysis can provide enough evidence to continue analyses and interpretations on delineating the unique and shared effects of human-associated variables and climate change.